Workshop - Returns to food and fibre businesses from training (option 1)-20251210_140348-Meeting Recording
10 December 2025, 01:03am
1h 58m 36s

Adam Barker started transcription

Adam Barker   0:03
Provide some context just by talking a little bit about sort of the return on investment from training. So this is an area that we have thought about about and many of the organizations that we have worked with we've thought a lot about.
And that's definitely sort of the focus for this one. And I wanted to just try and take two slides to work you up to sort of kind of the the why part of this conversation and I'd hopefully like to sort of get your thoughts on that as well, but just to set the scene here.
So we're sort of thinking about a system where there's at least four different types of investors in the training system. And so mainly thinking about formal training here, we've got a bunch of time and fees that learners pay.
We've got a bunch of employers that that invest potentially paying for some of those fees as well. They're investing their own time as well as potentially paying for their employees time to participate in training. That's employers individually, but you've also got sort of industry bodies and the industry collectively who.
May be putting in industry levies, they may be sort of investing in promoting training or or trying to encourage training. And then finally we've got all of us as taxpayers that are investing through the government and.
Subsidizing training and potentially as well as subsidizing the training itself, potentially providing sort of incentives around that like Apprentice Boost or other sort of employer incentives.
And then you've got all those same stakeholders that are all getting a set of different outcomes from that training. So learners are getting sort of better earnings, better job mobility.
Potentially sort of a range of other social benefits as well. Employers are hopefully getting more productive employees and so benefiting from more outputs or lower cost of production. The industry collectively is benefiting from higher productivity and potentially things like more staff availability.
And then all of us as taxpayers are benefiting, we hope through our government collecting more tax revenue from both individuals and firms and potentially sort of a whole range of social outcomes and environmental outcomes.
Um one.
Couple of couple of observations that sort of come from that. One is that this isn't just a normal return on investment calculation like sort of a company deciding whether to invest in a project or not, where the investor and the beneficiary are one and the same. We've got here a system where there's a whole lot of different investors and a whole lot of beneficiaries.
They're typically investing alongside of each other and they're all benefiting in different ways to different extents and probably varying quite a lot differently depending on the sort of the type of training it is and individual program it is. So it's quite a complex little bit of maths.
And that complexity, I'd argue, has been a large part of the reason why no one's really cracked the conundrum of trying to sort of quantify all of this stuff and put any numbers to this. So I'd like to to pose you a question.
And I'll just actually hide that part there for a second, just if we knew how much each of those parties was investing and if we actually knew how much impact training was having on each of those different outcomes.
That we've just seen there and if we actually had some sense of how much each of those parties valued those outcomes.
If we could do the analysis and answer all those questions, just be interested in your thoughts on what would we do differently in the VET system. What could we change? How could we actually do? How could we run the VET system differently or better?
And I guess I should say here, if none of you have a view on that or if you sort of actually sort of don't think there's any benefits in doing this, then the rest of this presentation will probably be quite dull because it does sort of assume that there's sort of a, there are some benefits of it and and that sort of.
I'm assuming that sort of to some extent you're interested in those benefits and then that's why you've made the time to to come along. But yeah, just would be interested in any reaction that anybody has as to.
Where it is that we could do better.

Craig Langdon   4:40
I'm happy to jump in if you'd like. Kia ora, everyone. I'm Craig Langdon. I'm the general manager of calls and standards at Mikitangata. From a narrow, selfish calls and standards perspective, it would enable us to develop more.

Adam Barker   4:44
Thanks, Greg.

Craig Langdon   4:56
Targeted qualifications that we knew would have good outcomes if we had that sort of information and understood where the investment would would be best put because that would flow back into the things that we develop. Occasionally we develop qualifications which are wanted.
Really have a significant effect, but if we knew what that was, it would really help us to be able to talk. This will result in that, which will result in that and that is the outcome that we all want to achieve, that sort of thing. So that sort of information would be quite helpful for us in the standard setting role.

Adam Barker   5:25
Thanks, Craig. Anybody else should I go?
I'll pick on Blair because Blair's very clever. I'm sure he'll have a view.

Blair Morgans   5:33
It is a bit of a Holy Grail, I think as you mentioned, Adam, yes, certainly. I mean targeting high what is valued by industry and employers, what is going to bring them the return could actually help in the whole program design process kind of on the back of what's available through the qualification.

Adam Barker   5:36
No.

Blair Morgans   5:53
Framework. So I think the key would be the key point is #2 really about understanding what effect each training program has on each outcome and that's always the challenging part. I think difficult to measure some things.
That aren't necessarily direct task related outcomes that you know have are then able to be measured over and above what the employer is doing with their own capital investment and things on farm. So in the past we have seen.
Some ROI where I think it attributed far too much to the training and it was actually throwing up unrealistic kind of returns. I think one example was $70.00 to every dollar invested was the return on training which didn't.
Didn't really gel with employers in that particular sector. So yeah, I think understanding the the, you know, what is going to provide the biggest impact and focus area for the training delivery that the employers in the industry value.
Yep.

Adam Barker   7:00
Thanks, Blair. Adrian.

Adrienne Dawson   7:04
I just because I don't, I like to not answer the question, but pose a question in return. Just to really kick things off for you, Adam, on that first slide when you talked about the.
Costs. There is a cost to the employer actually, in terms of learner mobility also. So many employers feel that if they spend their money.
Upskilling an employee that they will then leave. And that is true, actually. I don't know how much it happens in the food and fibre sector. Blair would probably know about this, but there's there's lots of tales of employers.
For example, taking on year 3 apprentices because all of the hard work has been done by their previous employer and training them and the costs associated with that, and they get someone who's basically really nearly fully formed and they haven't had to invest anything.
In them. So there is a cost there and I think also in terms of the employers individually, there's a production cost.
So it's not just taking, it's not just investing in somebody's time, you know, paying for someone to to attend a course or whatever it is. It's also it might be backfill for that person or or it might be a product.
Production drop in terms of that cost. So those are some of the things that we hear from employers whenever we try to introduce new content for into into training is that these are the things that concern.
Theme.

Adam Barker   9:08
Thanks, Adrian.
Yeah, no, that's and and this list is probably far from complete. I'd also argue that on mobility, there is a counter argument that says that employers that train in some cases may actually encourage staff to to stick around longer and that good employers do train as a way of retention, but very hard to show that.
Well, thank you. Let let me just give you the list that others have come up with in the course of this work so far. So I think both Blair and Craig sort of honed in on that sort of top point there. I think there's a potentially a couple of other benefits as well. One is to.
Add a little bit of sort of science as well as the art on the sort of debate on sort of should should industries be paying levies for training. I know that's been a topic that's sort of been controversial for the last sort of couple of months in the food and fibre sector.
And I would argue that sort of having some numbers could sort of make that a little bit less controversial.
Promoting the benefits of training to employers and learners that that is a challenging one because even if the numbers are more plausible than potentially 71, although there I'm going to come back to that number in a second because I'm going to argue that is that is very plausible, at least in some cases.

Blair Morgans   10:24
But.

Adam Barker   10:24
The it unfortunately what what a lot of this analysis is, is a little bit of a black box and it's pretty hard to try and explain that black box to an employer or learner sort of in a pithy kind of way. As I think we're going to discover, it's going to be pretty hard to try and explain it to a knowledgeable group of people like yourselves, even with.
In a bit of a two hour discussion. So nevertheless it potentially provides sort of a way to sort of promote training. And there's another audience that you can promote training to as well, which is the government who obviously has a large portfolio of investment opportunities they could invest in.
Promoting tourism or promoting environmental benefits or so on. And so how does the tertiary training system sort of advocate for its share of the taxpayer dollar? This sort of kind of analysis I would argue potentially helps the the likes of Treasury to sort of.
Sort of set alongside other investments that the investments in the tertiary sector.
I'd like to pause again there and sort of say, look, if if everything has bored you so far, if you've got sort of no appetite in talking about this sort of stuff anymore, then then please do feel free to leave again because otherwise I'm going to make make a very poor use of your next couple of hours. But I hope that there's something in here that you sort of can see might be interesting.
And and what I'd like to try and argue in this next hour and a half or so is I think we can make a reasonable first crack at that. How do we do it part, the hard part on that as Blair sort of framed it this question here knowing how much impact training has on different outcomes.
I think we can do it at at least an order of magnitude rough level and I think that might be enough. I'd like to try and sort of convince you that we can do it and I'd like to try and sort of enroll you to be part of the the doing of it by by helping to supply some of the inputs that will help to to make the modelling that we've done so far.
A little bit better. So that's really what sort of the guts of today's all about is trying to review what we have done, get get sort of your critique and thoughts on it. I will be unapologetically a little bit sort of analytical and and nerdy, get into the weeds a little bit.
I hope that that each of you is up for that. To a large extent you have been invited because you're the kind of person that I think is up for that, but hopefully we'll hear that out.
Right. Before doing so though, just quick agenda and then we'll do some introductions. So I'll introduce ourselves and then just introduce sort of what the work is actually about and where it's come from and then we'll sort of dive into the the modelling that is sort of really at the heart of this work and then.
Try to involve you and that the part there the improving the model inputs to that.
You will see a bit of a Lego theme to today's discussion. ChatGPT proved to be very helpful in generating a whole lot of images for me. I used up all my company tokens over the weekend trying to generate lots of Lego images, so.
You can choose which one you would like to be in this picture. And yeah, I'd just be keen if everybody could sort of introduce themselves as to where they've come from and what your interest in this topic might be today, so.
Looking at the top left Lego figure there, the person that probably looks most like that figure is probably you, Bill. Could I kick off with yourself?

Bill Kaye-Blake   14:00
Sure, absolutely. Top left. My hair has not looked like that in decades. But hi, I'm Bill Kaye Blake. I'm an economist. I work for the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research. As part of that, I've done work on the workforce in the food and fiber sector. I've also done other work on education.
And I've been having conversations with Adam about this modeling. So I'm here as to share some ideas and provide support. Thanks, Adam.

Adam Barker   14:29
Thanks Bill. Vanessa, you are both top middle in my screen and look most like the sort of the top middle in the Lego character. So Vanessa.

Vanessa Malloy   14:39
Hi, my name is Vanessa. I'm from NZKGI, so New Zealand Kiwi fruit industry body. So we advocate and represent obviously our Kiwi fruit growers in terms of any type of policy change and we're also doing quite a lot of work around what our future skills and training.
Will look like in terms of what skills we'll need and then obviously what training we'll need to to be implemented or follow on from that. So yeah, don't know too much about the modelling as yet and just yeah, eager to to learn a bit more.

Adam Barker   15:14
Looks like Tony would have just disappeared off the screen for a second, which is unfortunate because I think he is the one that's the fine hairstyle that looks like the gentleman on the top right there. But Jane, perhaps you are the one that's most like the middle.
Middle left.

Jane Muir   15:34
Hi, I'm Jane Muir from Dairy NZ. So yeah, my interest is in understanding really how we could ensure we've got better quality training available and that farmers engage with it more so that we can just build capability worldwide. There seems to be.
A real issue that we don't have the capability on farm that we need and that's definitely true in New Zealand. So yeah, anything that can help us understand how we could better deliver it would be appreciated.

Adam Barker   16:09
Anthony, could I come back to you? Just as the there's the Lego gentleman on the top right there looks much like yourself with that that stunning excellent hairstyle.

Antony Heywood   16:15
It's alright.
Thank you. I was picked myself as that top right. So yes, Anthony Haywood, C Vegetables New Zealand, getting a membership organisation like some of the others on the on the call.
We are focusing a lot in the kind of extension space and we see this as possibly as an ancillary to that. Mostly we have used RSE or fixed term employment as part of our.
Um, feed system for harvest. So we're looking at what that looks like because obviously we're all going through that technology revolution. So um, there's a different type of, uh, learner that we need. So we're just kind of.
Looking at that and seeing how we can build a better system.

Adam Barker   17:11
Anthony, the the quality of the match between the people and the the Lego characters is going to get harder and harder as we go along. But Jenny, perhaps next.

Jenny Sinclair   17:26
So yeah, I agree, Adam. I I couldn't see me on that screen. So I'm Jenny Sinclair. I'm from Dairy Training Limited, which is a subsidiary of Dairy NZ, and we develop and deliver micro-credentials for the dairy industry.

Adam Barker   17:45
Thanks, Jenny. Nicholas.

Nicholas Jolly   17:49
My name's Jolly. I work for Beef and Lamb New Zealand and am leading our response to the ongoing reforms, the education sector. So you're really keen to understand some of this research and and what the future could look like and.
Just generally upskilling because my background hasn't been in education, so I'm learning as I go. So yeah, very interested to see what you guys have been working on.

Adam Barker   18:20
You're right. Thanks, Nicholas. Um, Adrian.

Adrienne Dawson   18:25
I'm the current team lead in qualifications and standards for.

Adam Barker   18:37
And Blair.

Blair Morgans   18:39
Kia ora, everyone. I'm Blair. I'm a senior advisor at Primary ITO and kind of involved in funding policy data and currently out all of our transition work. Very interested in some of the more qualitative factors that you've touched on as well, Adam, kind of.
That are often or potentially sidelined when we're looking at ROI. Thanks.

Adam Barker   19:03
Excellent. And Hamish, are you there?

Hamish Hodgson   19:08
Yes, I am. And yeah, but sorry, I I did end up being able to make it to this meeting. I wasn't going to be able to. So you've got both Jenny and I here today. So I manage Dairy Training Limited, as Jenny mentioned before, a subsidiary of Dairy NZ.
And we work in the we're mainly delivering micro credentials for farmers. I think something of particular interest for me is is understanding what that value and returns aspect actually looks like so that when we're talking and engaging with farmers.
Being able to, I guess, have a bit more educated conversation with them on the benefits and also just I guess how we how we get education to farmers that's fit for purpose and that they appreciate.

Adam Barker   20:02
Thanks everyone. OK, um, I will take the reins back for a little bit. Um.
So just just again just to confirm sort of I guess the two main objectives that I've got for this session and I hope it aligns with yours. I'm keen just to sort of spread awareness of this project. We've we've sort of actually had a couple of different names stood at different points but but.
But putting a stake in the ground sort of as an approach we've called value based approach to investment. Let's just chat about sort of I guess what we've done, what we hope might comes next and and would love to get sort of your feedback or thoughts on that and then to.
Improve a couple of the key parts of it. We're going to sort of come in a sort of a half an hour or so. I hope to to sort of the part of the model that is probably the.
The most sensitive to the sort of the assumption, the inputs that are actually made and the best way that we've sort of really come up with so far to try and sort of do that has been to try and crowd source inputs from sort of a different group of people and that's what I'd be keen to try and do today.
Um.
Right. Just the background to this work. So this started off life as a project for the Food by the Cove and it's sort of kind of really always had two sponsors. The Food by the Cove sort of started it, initiated it more recently. Mukutangata has sort of picked up and sort of run with.
Some parts of it.
It's a project that started off with an impossibly broad project scope. The actual I've highlighted there in italics sort of some of the words that were actually written into the original project brief that was handed to us. So do a critical assessment into all aspects of that provision.

Hamish Hodgson   21:50
Sure.

Adam Barker   21:50
I hope you all agree that that sounded like a slightly broader scope than than what any sensible project manager would be prepared to take on. It did go on to sort of talk a little bit and put more detail about what they actually meant, but but it was still a very broad and amorphous scope, so quite a.
Lot of the time.
Spent in the initial part of the project, which was sort of about a year ago, was really trying to sort of discuss with stakeholders what aspects of the ideas that were requested from the food and fiber Cove would prove to be the most interesting and that led to the work down into this kind of area where we have been sort of focusing on the return on investment.
And and in particular, I guess the idea of if we could actually sort of have better data to try and sort of inform the kind of investments we're making, would we, for example, start thinking about investing in training that has sort of higher costs but also higher value and potentially lower volumes?
That's the kind of investments that um for most in most cases is is challenging to do today. But certainly in some areas of the food and fibre sector there's there's opportunities that have been identified rightly or wrongly that that might actually sort of offer better returns than some of what we do invest in today.
And that sort of view seemed to be sort of held pretty much regardless of sort of whereabouts in the vet system people were. So almost everybody we talked to in this work kind of agreed that there would be opportunities to try and invest better if sort of rules were different and rules allowed to do it, but we would need to sort of have.
The kind of analysis that would make that possible. So, so this project in a sense boiled down to having a go at trying to sort of build some modeling approaches to to make that quantification ROI analysis tractable to to try and sort of get a start on it.
I will emphasize the word start. It isn't that we have sort of completed everything. What we've tried to do is take a couple of steps along sort of a journey that I hope we'll have the opportunity to to keep chipping away at over time.
That making sense so far? Any questions or thoughts? I should say please to just through all of this, please do jump in with questions and thoughts. I will get really bored of my own voice if if no one does that. So would love it to have a few conversations as we go.
Yeah.

Blair Morgans   24:26
Just going back to the value based approach, what value kind of can imply certain things to people and that it's it's an economic value, that it's a financial benefit that they're going to make out of it. What about the wider kind of qualitative impacts of training that again you?
Touched on some of them about attraction, retention, providing learners with social opportunities, going to off job courses and things like that. Would you consider that they were part of the value and frame it that way? Yeah, yeah.

Adam Barker   24:57
Yeah, no, very much. Yeah, that that's, um, in in my sort of analytical Nirvana, you would.
And if you want to go back to this slide just to talk about it. So if if we knew the effect that programs were having on each outcome, those outcomes could include social values. And then the second part of that might be to sort of say, well, what value do those different stakeholders put on those different outcomes, those environmental?

Blair Morgans   25:10
Hmm.
Yeah.

Adam Barker   25:26
Social community, non-economic outcomes and and there's that's the sort of dark arts that economists like Bill and occasionally amateurs like I sort of dabble in trying to sort of use things like choice modeling and other techniques to try and attribute value to some of those social outcomes.
Treasury obviously does that a whole lot with the kind of it. It values social outcomes to try and help government agencies make good investment decisions around things like that. So yes, and a very much in my, you know, view of the world, we would be thinking about all of those different outcomes and putting them all up as part of the analysis to try and sort of.

Blair Morgans   25:45
Yep.

Adam Barker   26:05
Outside of the portfolio. And that's important too, because there's a couple of numbers I'm going to put in front of you in a second that will probably invoke some ire. And that's in part because thus far the scope of the work has only really been to look at 2 outcomes, just two.
Which is sort of learner economic outcomes and business economic outcomes. So just economic ones. But that's not because we think that's all that's important. It's just because that's that's what we bit off first essentially.

Blair Morgans   26:35
Cool. Thank you.

Adam Barker   26:37
Yeah. So that's a nice segue into just what have we actually done in this work. So we we had a go at building a model to estimate the impact of training on learner lifetime earnings. That's that's an area where quite a lot of people have done sort of work over the last.
Few decades, both in New Zealand and overseas. In New Zealand, we actually have the ability to use the integrated data infrastructure or the IDI, which gives us a pretty good data set to try and actually do that in a sort of a reasonably credible and data rich kind of way and groups like MOE.
Others have have started to do some of that work. Um.
The work to try and sort of characterize business profitability and productivity I think is harder. That's it's sort of from an analytical point of view, a more challenging task and and much harder to try and sort of do with data alone the.
The data on business profitability is really noisy. There's all sorts of challenges because people are pretty good at sort of creating tax accounts that sort of don't necessarily show the whole truth of what's going on and different legal entities might contain different parts of a business model and and so on. So the data is a lot noisier.
You can potentially make some sort of form of correlation between training activity and business profitability, but even then the correlation is not a proof of the causality. So we have very much sort of gone down a modelling approach rather than a data approach in this kind of work and and I'll spend some time.
At the risk of sort of being a very tedious analyst, trying to sort of talk about how we've done that modelling work and and try to sort of, I hope, convince you that this modelling approach will actually be robust enough to sort of get us in the right ballpark.
Then we also had a go at trying to just weight those outcomes. So I sort of said just before there that we as well as sort of measuring how much impact training has on each of those two different outcomes, we need some way of sort of putting all those different outcomes into the sort of the the cauldron together, stirring them up and sort of say what are they?
What are they all worth in aggregate? So we had the the very beginnings of a sort of a stab at trying to sort of create a tool that might do that from the point of view. This is important from a government investor perspective. So this was looking at it from just the perspective of only one of those investors.
And then we had a go at sort of putting all of those things into a spreadsheet tool that thus far that's kind of what the project was able to do is to build a spreadsheet prototype. We would love in the fullness of time to be able to sort of turn that into a web tool as a way of sharing that more widely.
We've also built that same business profitability model into another tool that has been developed. We've been working with Mukutangata over the last year and a half to try and sort of develop what's called a skills forecasting tool, which is sort of a simulation of the food and fibre workforce.
And we've been using the the business profitability model to sort of provide an overlay of that model to try and say what impact might occur for the workforce or sorry, what impact on business profitability might we make if we change the amount of training?
Going into the to the food and fiber workforce. So it's a sort of a an output that we can analyze using that tool.
For today's discussion, I'm really going to sort of try and focus on the part on the top right there, trying to sort of delve in on the sort of business profitability and productivity tool and and look at that.
Ian, any questions or thoughts at this point?
Beerous mud. OK, right. I hope I am going to sort of invoke some sort of reactions that says this doesn't sound believable. This is just some preliminary outputs from this model we.
Developed 5 training programs to sort of, sorry, 5-6 training programs we wanted to sort of have a have a look at through this modeling approach based loosely on real programs and some of you present will recognize things that look a little bit like things that your organizations actually offer.
But they were deliberately sort of budged a little bit in order just to try and sort of provide sort of a veneer of anonymity, but also more importantly to try and sort of take the focus off getting the numbers exactly right because this is.
Not something we are aspiring to try and get exactly right. It's you can sort of see from the some of the ranges that are on the screen there that the aspiration here is to try and sort of be able to estimate what I sort of call the the half order of magnitude of things. So try and sort of pick a lower bound and then an upper bound which might be sort of something like three times that lower bound.
Number and sort of say it's probably in that kind of range. That's roughly I hope about how accurate we feel this could be and I think accurate enough to be useful. And in part that's because and we'll come to this on the right hand column there, you can sort of see potentially how different some of.
The results are for some of the different training programs, which suggests that even if the numbers are wrong in an absolute sense, I hope the approach will be value in being able to sort of compare between different investment options. It should be at least be sort of self-consistent in terms of doing that and in comparing over time.
So even if the model is sort of fairly rough, it does, I still hope, pass the test of being useful.
Anybody want to have a violent reaction to that number on the top there that that we've argued that the returns from a government's point of view to investing a dollar in a micro credential for agribusiness budgeting is something like 100 to 300 to 1.
Which sounds like an astounding number. I'll give you a view on to where they might come from in a second, but.
Any other reactions before we launch into that?
No, Jane, you got a right smile.

Jane Muir   33:04
Oh yeah, I was just thinking it does seem like quite a big number, isn't it? So I'll probably need a bit more detail before I'm a believer.

Adam Barker   33:08
Yeah.
Yep. Excellent. OK.

Craig Langdon   33:12
Did did Hamish write the slide 'cause it looks like it?

Jane Muir   33:14
Yeah.

Adam Barker   33:16
Yeah, well, I I conflict of interest. I do work with Hamish a lot and with Jenny, but but so so that conflict of interest needs to be noted and acknowledged. But at the same time I also work with Hamish and Jenny who have that same program on the very bottom of that list, so.
So I will at least offer that in some sense. I'm trying to be unbiased. Um, OK um.

Hamish Hodgson   33:41
Sorry, Adam, I was just gonna say one. Um.
I mean, yeah, I I we've had a conversation before and sort of you haven't got an idea about how you go to that. But I guess an observation on it is quite interesting that some of the I guess farm production stuff doesn't weight a bit higher than.
The agribusiness and budgeting stuff from a government return perspective, mainly on the basis that from what I understand about the agribusiness and budgeting components of the microcredential, a lot of it is about managing costs.
It's not necessarily returning an increased amount of exports, which I would have thought would have fitted more on that production instant. Just was a interesting thought that I had while looking at that.

Adam Barker   34:36
Well, hopefully that'll come a little bit sort of clearer as we get into sort of to to why, why this is the way that it's has come out. You could argue whether it's the right reasons, but but yeah, what we have.
The the approach effectively is to sort of argue it from a business profitability point of view. So we haven't sort of looked at this through the double export lens or or other potential lenses that you can look at through where we've looked at it through the what is the impact on business profits.
OK. So just before sort of ripping into the sort of the modelling and and sort of how we've got to those sort of kind of slightly outrageous numbers, just like to sort of share where I hope this work might go.
I would love it if it could be used in the way that Craig described earlier that industry groups and ISB are using it in their advice to TEC about what training programs should and should not receive investment or shaping the design of training programs and by providers like Dairy Training Limited and Primary ITO and others to try and sort of.
Self evaluate the kind of impact that their training is having for different stakeholders and and being able to sort of factor that into sort of what they choose to do. And obviously as an analyst eco, I'd love to try and sort of see this tool developing in particular by sort of sharing it more widely. So I talked about the idea that we've got of.
Potentially trying to sort of take it out of a spreadsheet and put it into some sort of web tool that would make it a whole lot easier for people to use and to to find and to to see adding more of those outcomes in, including what Blair was mentioning earlier around sort of incorporating some of those social outcomes.
And justice making it more robust.
Despite my assertions that I think the number is sort of probably believable. I think more testing, more critique, more calibration, more review will continue to make this work better. And I'd like to sort of present that as sort of as an ongoing journey of improvement rather than sort of just a one-off exercise.
So no small part of sort of the reason I'm inviting you today is because I hope that in some small way you can be part of this journey. I I hope that you might see enough in this to sort of suggest that there is some value in it and that you might be tempted to try and sort of.
Become a user or become a sort of an advocate for it in some shae or form.
OK, right. Time to put on our nerdy hats. So I'm actually going to try and I did originally sort of write this agenda, sort of thinking we might sort of do an overview of the model and then try and sort of get into sort of a bit of a calibration session and that.
Is kind of how this will run, but there is at least one part where it sort of makes more sense to try and sort of jump in and do the sort of the the group based thing earlier. So I will mix mix these two parts together.
Um.
The Lego sign disclaimer right up front. All models are wrong. Some models are useful paradigm. What's the word cliche that we all know this is definitely going to be the case here. There is going to be all sorts of ways that as we go through this conversation that you will identify.
That this model is not going to be perfect or is not going to be wrong. What I would like to try to convince you of is that it's not wrong enough to stop it being useful. I I think despite all the things that we will find will be wrong, I would like to argue that we can still make a reasonable start to try and sort of get some of those estimates.
We can still get something that is actually useful, even if it is something that just needs to be sort of the basis for ongoing improvement.
OK, the starting point for this, the the theory of change or the the qualitative logic that this analysis is built around is a sort of a chain of events that I think will be familiar to most of you in various different guises.
This sort of logic model has various different names. Bennett's hierarchy is one that sort of appears in the extension world a lot, and Kirkpatrick's model is one that sort of appears in education circles, but but when you sort of.
Analyse and they're basically saying the same thing. So the idea is that if we can build capability, capability will lead to different practices because capability is one of the determinants of how we behave and those different practices will in turn lead to different.
Outcomes of interest, including productivity and profitability, in this case within sort of a an agribusiness or a farm business. The model logic effectively follows this cause and effect.
And I'm going to try and sort of for today's purposes break the discussion into kind of sort of three broad parts. I'm going to take those parts though out of order in the course of sort of developing this and communicating this probably.
Probably sort of changed the order every single time I've tried to communicate it because it seems to testing different ways to try and sort of to tell this story. But I'm going to start with trying to describe a model of a team's capability in effect kind of sort of how much do different.
People contribute towards the the overall capability and influence of a team on business profitability and and that's going to sort of provide one of the clues to why we were getting such high results for those agribusiness training courses.
Then the second thing we're gonna try and do is relate that model of team capability to some data on business profitability. So we actually are sort of lucky enough in the food and fiber industry to have a couple of data sets that actually do give us pretty good data on the spread of business profitability.
And that spread turns out to be sort of a really interesting and key concept here because it's likely that capability is a very large proportion of what causes that spread and we can use that result to sort of provide a sort of a calibration point for us on just how influential capability is on.
Business profits and then finally and the part that I'm most keen to and sort of gauge you all on is the part that we actually sort of start to pull apart individual capability. So we've got sort of a model of.
Capability in terms of a team capability being the sum of those individuals and we've sort of calibrated that team against some sort of data on business profits. That gives us a bit of a feel for sort of how much different roles and different industries might influence profitability.
What we want to try and get in after that is to try and sort of delve down and say what causes that that individual capability, what are the determinants of that? And in particular we're interested in is just how important is training with respect to experience and with respect to.
Sort of a thing that I'll call innate ability, which is effectively kind of everything that's not training or not experience.
How are we going so far? Is that sort of sounding, sounding plausible?
The name of the presentation, for those who spotted at the beginning, and the reason for the Lego blocks theme is because.
We are sort of trying to sort of take a big problem, which is sort of lots of different Lego blocks, and we're going to try and sort of just gradually disassemble the Lego set, basically break this thing down into different chunks. So this is really the the first disassembling step. We're going to try and take this problem and and describe it in terms of three separate parts.
I'm just gonna go into sort of now a little bit of a sort of a tangent and actually having said that, I was gonna start at sort of #1, the sub model of the team capability. I'm actually just gonna do a small side little jaunt into what I was referring to around calibration data around.
That business profitability and share this result here. This chart and the previous variance of it have fascinated me for probably the better part of about sort of 15 years now. So it's the this is what you're looking at is the.
Data that comes from Dairy NZ in their economic survey and in turn from their dairy based system on the profitability of dairy farms, different dairy farms by hectare around New Zealand. And the thing that's really amazing for me is just how much that profitability varies.
And if we sort of just to sort of put that in context, if you start thinking about a firm, a farm that's one standard deviation, if you just roughly imagine you could sort of fit a bit of a bell curve sort of distribution around this thing, you sort of say a firm that's one standard deviation.
Better than the average might be something like sort of $1000 per hectare more profitable than an average farm. And the average dairy farm in New Zealand is something like 150,000, sorry 150 hectares so.
It sort of says that being able to shift one standard deviation in business profitability is worth something like $150,000 per year, every year, which sort of I find is sort of an amazing.
Disparity. And then if you can imagine someone that's actually jumping out to standard deviations, you can sort of start seeing that the firm, the farms that are in the top one or 2% are something like $6000 per hectare per year or over $1,000,000 per year more profitable.
Than a farm that's operating in the bottom one or 2%.
I find that a staggering difference, a staggering spread, and that's that's another one of those reasons why we're sort of saying that there is potentially so much.
Opportunity from training and why those really high Agri business training returns are there. The sort of the the opportunity that exists is because the spread is so large and at least some proportion of the spread.
I think is due to human capability.
I'm going to ask your thoughts on just how much that portion might be in a second, but I'd just like to offer one observation first. When I when I first started seeing this chart and I was at the time I was sort of in a contract where I was managing the dairy base team for dairy NZ. So I sort of.
Was lucky enough to be able to sort of just poke my nose into some of the data and play with it. And one of the things I was interested in when we were trying to generate benchmark data for Dairy NZ was when we started looking at this by region and so treating Canterbury farms different to Northland farms or different to Taranaki farms.
The spread stayed more or less exactly the same when we started looking at big farms versus little farms. Still, the spread stayed almost exactly the same when we started looking at system 3 farms versus system one farms versus system 5 farms.
The mean shifted a little bit, you sort of slightly higher sort of mean profitability and so on. But the spread didn't really change much at all and almost all the attributes that we could control for in sort of physical terms, the size, the system, the.
None of those really changed the storyline of of this particular chart. We were.
The things that were explaining this chart were not things that we could actually see in the data we had available to us. So the conclusion that I draw from it is that this spread is mostly explained by subtle stuff that we can't really even see. So there is difference between the topography and the fertility.
Or the soils within a region. So within Waikato or Canterbury, there's sort of there are difference in the quality of the sort of the physical assets that sort of farmers have available to them as well as the financial assets that they have deployed in terms of things like their milk sheds and so on.
But my conjecture is that a decent chunk of this variation is explained by the difference in capability of the teams. Cool. So at this point I'd be keen to sort of run a little thought experiment with all of you and just get you to sort of offer up your thoughts, your gut feel.
On sort of how much of this difference is explained by people and how much is explained by the physical stuff.
So I'm going to pose a question like this. Assume that the variation of dairy farm profitability is due to just two things, the variation of the capital employed, that's both the natural capital and sort of the financial capital and onzillic infrastructure and the variation of the human capability of the farm team.
The farm management and the farm employees.
So I'd like to pose you a multi-choice question. Do you think that variation is explained 90% capital, 10% human capability or the bottom option is the opposite of that? There's a 5050 option if you want to hedge your bets in the middle.
All of you will sort of probably have some instinct. I suspect for this would be interested to just in in your gut feel and I'd be interested in trying to capture that gut feel um through. We've got just a little survey tool that we use just to try and capture everybody's thoughts and then we'll um.
Be able to see what everybody else says at the same time, so I've sort of put the link to that in the chat.
So I'll get you to, we'll have a click on that link. Hopefully that will take you to a survey tool and if you could have a go at answering the first question.
Everyone had a go at that.
The excellent news is so far what you've got there is pretty consistent with sort of whenever we've done this exercise in the past, we've sort of had a broadly similar kind of result that does seem to be sort of most people's instinct that it's sort of something like 5050.
I've sort of asked this question in loosely similar workshops about sort of five or six times over the last sort of seven or eight years and and almost always the answer sort of comes out to sort of be in that same sort of range, sort of.
Not too many people are prepared to go out there to the 9010 and so I congratulate those of you that did pick that one. Most people sort of pick between sort of 3070 and 7030 and in a couple of slides time.
Bill has actually sort of helped me to sort of actually understand another data point that might actually also.
Help to validate that that isn't sort of actually totally missing the mark. So what I hope you can take from that is that.
Back up here, we do have a a ginormous opportunity. We have the spread of capability that is causing the spread of profitability that is probably sort of setting out a prize that is measured in the billions of dollars per year when you just multiply the the standard deviations you see on that chart.
Times the 50% or so that you've sort of just sort of been up in the answer there times the 1.5 million hectares or so that are in dairy farming. You can imagine that sort of the the opportunity to close the capability gap is is a nine figure.
Some and that's that's kind of one of the key drivers that sort of really driving those return on investments, Jane.

Jane Muir   51:58
I was just wondering if they have we done that graph with like so it's return on investment.

Adam Barker   52:07
Um, well, we haven't. Well, we haven't got a cost in here yet. So, so thus far, this is really just trying to tell us the size of the prize. Um, so.

Jane Muir   52:08
The variations.
Do you know what I mean? Like if it was variation across um of return on investment per hectare, simply because the capital component would presumably be like allowed for. So the cost of the land and the infrastructure would presumably be allowed for.

Adam Barker   52:25
Oh, I see. Yep.
Right.

Jane Muir   52:38
If you did it a bit more ROI, it just might help figure out what that percentage split is a little bit more.

Adam Barker   52:43
Yeah, yeah. Return on asset I think would actually be the the, the KPI that you'd actually choose. Yeah, I I haven't done that I must confess, but you're right that would that would improve this analysis, wouldn't it, if we did that to ****?

Jane Muir   52:46
You will return on essay, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. And I don't, I don't know if we we have it, but it would be interesting because it might, yeah, it would just throw up a different, a different question. And if one of the core very reasons for that variation is like say Kiwi's obsession with land.

Adam Barker   52:59
Yes.

Jane Muir   53:12
For example, and people actually paying too much for for land which isn't profitable. Not suggesting that the human capability part isn't massive, but anyway.

Adam Barker   53:16
Yeah.
Yeah, I think actually years and years and years ago, Nicola Shadbolt said exactly the same thing to me. I know, sort of like, yeah, she was arguing, which should use return, yeah.

Jane Muir   53:31
Maybe get our economists, our economists on it.

Adam Barker   53:36
Thank you, Nicholas.

Jane Muir   53:37
Hmm.

Nicholas Jolly   53:38
I was just going to say for a sheep and beef example, the sheep and beef survey and benchmarking data, you can sort of split that out by stock units and per hectare basis and look at different quintiles and exactly what you're you're pointing out here on the dairy side of things, there's huge difference.
Between the low performing and the high performing farms and the red meat profit partnerships a little bit before my time. But my understanding was that that kind of looked at a whole bunch of different farms and looked at which ones were profitable and which ones weren't and found that there was basically.
Nothing that they had in common apart from good business management. So it was, you know, like you say that the size of the prize is huge and sort of shifting that knowledge or improving that knowledge and getting everyone up to the level of the the top 20% that there's huge gains to be had. So yeah, more just.
Comment saying that the sheep has data that would back up what you're saying and completely agree with your point.

Adam Barker   54:42
Cool. Thank you. Yeah. I guess the the two pastoral industry, sheep and beef and and dairy are blessed with having sort of economic services or dairy based in the case of dairy NZ that that do collect this data. But I'd be pretty surprised if the same story didn't apply equally to.
Vegetable growing Anthony or or horticulture or or other industries.
Um, OK, I'm conscious of time. I keep plowing through. Um, I'm gonna just move through these next couple of slides at a reasonable pace and apologies if um.
I guess, I guess to be honest, I I don't think I'm going to be a good enough teacher to try and sort of make everything sort of comprehensible in one go. I would love to believe that I could, but please, this isn't really what what I hope I can give it to you, but there is a methodological approach behind this that that approach sort of.
Does take things step by step and that there is at least something that sort of can be peer reviewed and and Bill is here in large part because he's been able to provide value and and has helped me to try and make this a better approach.
The next sort of step in the story is to sort of go and look at the the GDP per worker. So GDP per worker is a nice measure of productivity and it's sort of we're going to use sort of kind of two measures on this both profitability and.
Productivity. So the next few slides are going to be sort of focused on sort of productivity and using this measure of GDP per worker. And what we see for most of the food and fibre sector, the productivity per worker is below the national average. Dairy farming turns out to be a little bit of an exception.
And we'll come to why that might be in a second. And here I'm gonna sort of delve into a little bit of economics, which I'm gonna confess I am no expert on. Thankfully, Bill is here to.
Make me ever so slightly smarter. We can think about what that GDP per worker is in a couple of parts. There is sort of the labour part to that on the right. Just for now, let's call it sort of labour per worker, but you could think of that as being the human capability term.
The different texts sort of describe that as labor quality or human capability or just simply capability as I'll use it here. And then there's another term there which is sort of the capital, so how much capital is being sort of deployed.
Again, both sort of that physical capital or the financial capital.
And it's sort of a couple of sort of just and then there's sort of a multi-factor productivity which is sort of, I'll call it sort of a constant which basically sort of drops out and makes the numbers work. But the key thing really here is the sort of those two different terms.
One key observation is that those two things are multiplied by each other, not just added to each other. So what that means is if you can make human capability higher, it's sort of multiplied by the capital that's been employed on a business. And so if you've got a sort of an industry that has sort of quite a lot of capital being employed.
You know, second will argue that sort of describes say dairy farming reasonably well. The impacts of the human capability is sort of multiplied through by that capital that's sort of geared. So yeah, you think of it as sort of like a sort of a financial leverage on capability.
The final comment here on this slide is that little value AA and 1 minus alpha. Those terms are there to try to sort of say how important is capital relative to labour in explaining variation in GDP per worker.
And those values turn out to be sort of pretty close to 5050. So sorry, I remember this one is .45 and one is .55. I'm just going to round them to .5.

Bill Kaye-Blake   58:49
Capital capital smaller than labor.

Adam Barker   58:54
So when we did that exercise before and we sort of said sort of roughly 5050 between human capital and financial capital.
I'd suggest that we weren't sort of 1,000,000 miles apart from what this economic model has actually argued as the sort of the right split between those two things and importance as well. So validating that you are indeed all brilliant that you have sort of picked something in the the 5050 kind of range.
OK, um, please just sing out if anybody's got any sort of things I'd like to try and sort of raise at this point, but um.
I will keep plowing on. So, so one thing we can actually start doing is just dividing up for those different industries what might be the sort of the capital component and then what might be the labor component of those different.
GDP per workers. Now at this point here I've I've actually departed a little bit from trying to use real numbers to kind of sort of using charts just to try to illustrate the points. So please don't take the numbers on this slide or the next few too literally. They are really are sort of almost just illustrative numbers rather numbers that have dropped.
Directly out of the modeling because a lot of what actually I'm sort of sharing is actually sort of recent revisions to the modeling approach, so I can sort of attribute Bill's guidance for and and the actual.
Spreadsheet itself hasn't actually caught up with all of those changes. So yeah, so please just don't sort of quote these numbers too liberally if if if you feel any the actual totals for these numbers are right or come from a a semi reputable source but but the the splits are not.
So we've got a sort of first thing to say, we've got this breakdown by industry and we can sort of start sort of seeing just potentially some differences in things like the gearing that that capability is getting in dairy farming because you've got this big capital component which sort of gives you sort of leverage to your capability.
And that's less so for other industries.
The other big an averaging that we've tried to do is to start thinking about the relative contributions that different role levels on different businesses make. So we've got.
We've we've sort of defined 4 different role levels. They might have different titles and different industries, but broadly sort of someone that's sort of an entry level worker, someone that's sort of perhaps sort of three to four years into their career, someone that's maybe 5 to 10 years into the career and then someone that's really sort of managing.
A large business or or potentially the owner of that business.
And you can imagine that the more senior you climb up that hierarchy, the more influence that you have over the financial capital and the physical capital of the business. And so the amount of your, again that gearing on your capability increases more and more the more senior you get.
As well as of course, just your capability grows and the contribution you get, the GDP per worker that comes from your capability is also growing. And in the modelling, what we've tried to do is make some assumptions to try and arrive at a view on sort of what the.
The unaveraged GDP per worker might look like for different roles and in different industries. And again, what you're possibly getting out of the straightaway just the observation is that the stakes are much higher for a farm owner than they are for a farm assistant.
So a small change in capability and percentage terms for a farm owner is going to have much more impact on GDP than a small change in capability for a farm assistant.
OK, all good with that concept. Any people are mostly nodding, I think.
OK. So then we've tried to just assemble those numbers into sort of some of these little farm team models. So if I picked a dairy farm team, a typical dairy farm team might look something like 1 owner and maybe .4 of a farm manager and .3 of a herd manager because not every dairy.
Has someone that has that particular title and maybe something like 1.8 farm assistance. And if we sort of add up all those weighted averages of those GDP person, we might sort of say that the the GDP or a farm business might be something in the order of $600,000 per year.
As the the, the average, the median, of course we're know from the previous chart that that average varies an awful lot or we suspect it's going to vary an awful lot and we'll use that result in a second. We could do the same thing for a seafood processing business and we've got in this case.
Many more people in a seafood processing team and I've sort of assumed some splits between those different role levels there. Those assumptions are just that kind of sort of me really making some sort of.
Guesses. Semi educated guesses, I guess, rather than sort of anything that I have real data on.
Unfortunately, seafood processing is not quite as useful as dairy as in this particular example because there is so many more of those roles. A lot of that capability variation averages out, whereas in dairy farming there's the smaller team means that the capability variation can't average out quite as much.
And that turns out to be helpful. So again, let's just come back to this chart. And remember, the thing we're actually really interested in this analysis is not actually just how big these different GDP per workers are, but.
How much this varies? So how much variation do we see between the GDP per worker of the most capable farm owner out there and the least capable farm owner out there? How much variation is there between the farm manager, top and bottom, herd manager, top and bottom, farm assistant, top and bottom, and so on?
And so to get that, we could sort of start thinking about the if we assume that that variance and capability is sort of roughly proportional to the.
To the to the role weightings, we could sort of figure out that the variance is going to be for a dairy farm, probably something like 2/3 is going to be due to the farm owner and only maybe 20% due to the 1.8 farm assistance.
That are working on that farm, we can sort of straight away see that the farm owner is going to be the person you want to try and train because that person controls so much more of the capability variation between different farms.
We can also then use that result and combine combine this observation with the sort of that observation we had back there and we can sort of start putting a number.
To this variance and team GDP, we can basically use the spread of this number. We can relate it to the to the importance over here that these different roles have in explaining a farm's.
Total GDP and we can sort of work backwards from that to try and basically calculate the size of those error bars up here or in other words, how much that how big that spread is.
And when we're gonna eventually arrive at a result that says the standard deviation in capability or GDP per worker of someone working in the dairy farm is probably something like 30% to 50%.
Of their the average GDP per worker. So quite a widespread and only such a spread can explain such a widespread and the result that we see over here.
So what I just summarize that means that we've got to so far that if we've got some data on the spread of GDP on on the GDP per worker for different industries and we've got some data on the spread of the profitability of dairy farms.
And we can make some assumptions around how important different role levels are to businesses, some assumptions around the makeup of different teams, some assumptions around the importance of labour and capital and explaining the variation of profitability. That's the assumption that that you guys made in in that survey.
And we've got some sort of assumption on the as I just skipped over this one, we when we were sort of jumping between the measurement of profitability and the measurement of productivity, we do need to make some assumptions around sort of.
How much of the variation that's due to capability is captured in the profits of the firm and how much of the variation and capability is captured in the the wages of the people. So am I paying all the difference in capability to the to the wages of the people or am I sort of able to capture that benefit in terms of creative profit?
We've kind of assumed in the model that it's roughly 5050. If we've got all those different assumptions and data sets, we can use that all together to make an assumption of how much GDP per worker varies as a result of varying levels of capability.
And we can do that for every role level and we can do that for every industry.
Who's still with me?
I, I, I would be delighted if you were smart enough to sort of be able to follow all of that. I hope that you've at least sort of captured that there is sort of a little bit of a method behind the madness. We have sort of got a logic where we've tried to arrive at a point as we've basically said we can say how big the prize is of getting.
In this capability thing, right?
If we could sort of get, yeah, if we could increase capability from sort of average to sort of best practice, we've got now some idea of sort of saying what's that worth to us.
Adrian.

Adrienne Dawson   1:09:40
Am I right in thinking that like if you use the farm owner that that slide that you had up there before that that actually where you see the the most?
Return on investment for training is for that farm owner is that like if you were to extrapolate from this to say.

Adam Barker   1:10:02
Um.
Yeah, I mean, there's there's a.

Adrienne Dawson   1:10:07
Capability versus capital means where you would likely to see the biggest.

Adam Barker   1:10:13
Yeah.

Adrienne Dawson   1:10:14
Benefits would be for that role, for training for that role is or is that too much of A leak?

Adam Barker   1:10:19
Yeah, all other things being equal, that's right. No, no, all other things being equal that that's exactly right. So, so just, I mean a couple of sort of caveats to that. So all we have the only benefit we've considered so far is the business benefit. So we haven't considered Blair's social benefits or other outcomes he might be interested in as well. So there are.

Adrienne Dawson   1:10:36
Yeah.

Adam Barker   1:10:39
Other outcomes we're interested from training that the opposite might apply to. So if we were interested in sort of social equality or literacy or numeracy, we might be better off to focus on farm assistance than we are on farm owners. So just just remember the scope of this analysis is limited to business profitability, but yes, if your business profitability.
Is the what you're focused on then and and if you sort of said that the cost of training a farm owner is the same cost as training a farm assistant and and in practice those costs are probably different but but if we just assumed for now that they were the same then.
Then this analysis said you should spend every dollar on training farm owners because you're going to get far more bang for your buck by training farm owners than you are farm assistants.
And and I do genuinely believe exactly that. I if if if I was spending all my money, that's where I'd spend it, because you're gonna get just such a much better return.
Um.
OK. If everyone's still happy to keep going, I will wade into the to the next part of this, which is sort of coming back to you guys. So we've sort of thus far sort of said what's it worth to try and make an individual more capable?
And we can segment those individuals up by their role and by their industry. The next part of this puzzle is to try and sort of figure out, trying to sort of pull apart the Lego bricks that make up capability. And I'm going to pose to you that there's three kinds of Lego bricks here.
There's experience and differences in experience, and we've got this wondrous thing which I'm going to lump together and call innate ability, and we've got the training. The training is actually the bit we're most interested in here, but those other two things are also potentially things that it is an industry we could.
Try to influence by, for example, retaining staff in the industry longer would grow our experience, or by being able to recruit a better caliber of new recruit, we might be able to change the innate ability, but training is the the one that we're most interested in here.
And so the question that I'd like to pose here is, well, how do we understand which of those three things is responsible for capability or how do those three things interact to try and sort of build capability? So I'd like to work with you to try and sort of build a model to try and describe how each of those things.
Could work and would be keen to try and sort of do a few calibration exercises with you. These ones will be a little bit more challenging and and you guys are very much Guinea pigs for sort of the way I've tried to ask these questions.
So we'll see how well it works. I I hope that it will work, but but this may need sort of a bit of sort of joint conversation to to go with it.
OK. So I'd like to sort of start this story by looking at experience and I'd like to think about experience as being as experience changes over time and time here is on the X axis that your productivity as a sort of a worker grows quite steeply at 1st and then.
Gradually flattens off and it sort of probably goes through some sort of curve that looks something like that.
You can probably imagine other sort of variations on this curve. You might have. Some people sort of have argued that it's probably a little bit of an S curve that might happen there with sort of in the first couple of years you sort of.
Grow slowly and then it sort of accelerates a bit faster. Some people argue that you don't start at zero. You might start. No one's got zero productivity to start with. Possibly you might start a little bit higher up, but those things don't probably matter too much for this, so I'll just.
Kind of like to.
Offer U this as sort of being a reasonable starting point.
And and then actually then make one further simplification on this next slide that says that you're going to be a whole lot easier from modelling point of view if you idealize this curve to look a little bit more like that that that for some period in your career you get.
More experience and you become more productive overtime, but after some point in time, you've kind of reached the point at which additional experience isn't really contributing a lot to the.
To to your productivity, you might still be learning, but that learning that that ongoing learning and experiences probably just helping you to sort of to maintain your productivity rather than to actually continue to to grow it.
Is that model making sense?
Reasonably comfortable with it. OK, so the first question is like to get a sense of your judgment on what the how many years are we at that point there and like to sort of pose it for two different.
Kinds of capabilities. So like to loosely sort of think about this as sort of being for I've said sort of for farm practices, but that's going to be for orchard practices or seafood harvesting practices.
Um. Or um. Yep, no. What we've got? Um.
Between farms, orchards, we've got the two keywords for the the groups here. So yeah, just like to get your sense on sort of is it one year by the time you sort of hit that point and I should sort of clarify this is across all roles too. So we're sort of thinking here about sort of an entire.
Career of a person, so um.
And I should clarify, this is a person of sort of, I guess, average innate ability. We'll come back to that innate ability in a second. But sort of someone who's middle of the pack in terms of their innate ability, when do they sort of top out? So could I return you to that survey? Again, that link is in the chat and.
Have a girl that trying to do that question.
And that's sort of the first one, sorry for those more production related farm practices. So this is sort of the the growing, growing grass or growing Kiwi fruit or growing vegetables and then it's managing your animals or.
The production related aspects of a farm rather than the sort of the business and management aspects of a farm.
How many years before you've kind of sort of flattened out?
OK, that's interesting. That's a lot shorter than what we've actually modeled so far, so.
That's interesting. Cool. Thank you. OK, then could I get you to try and sort of do the same thing then for sort of the management practices? So this is your people management, your financial management, your business planning.
Those those kind of skills.

Hamish Hodgson   1:18:16
Just a question on that Adam, presumably that's um.
Like you don't sort of start learning those management practices until you're in a management role. So I'm I'm taking that as from the moment you enter in a management role to when you reach confidence.

Adam Barker   1:18:36
Um.

Hamish Hodgson   1:18:37
Are you or are you saying right from your?

Adam Barker   1:18:38
No, no, this is really right from the beginning. Yeah. So we have kind of argued, I guess, that you are still probably being exposed to those things.
Even if you're not actually doing those things, you are possibly learning those things from your peers and from your boss and so on.

Hamish Hodgson   1:18:53
Sweet.
So if we're using the dairy farming example that's from farm assistant, they will write through to farm management and farm owner until you're you've reached confidence in those carriers.

Adam Barker   1:19:09
Yeah, that's right. So, so I guess it's sort of really how many years as a farm owner been in the dairy business by the time they reach that flattening out point, including the time that they've sort of done as a farm assistant and a herd manager and as a farm manager.
Yeah, cool. So much bigger numbers for looks of it for what everybody's got there, is everybody, sorry, everybody's sort of seen the results chart.
Yeah. OK. That's been great. Thank you. So, so your instincts are that the.
You know, sort of something like 5 to 8 years we had for the sort of the production results, but sort of two or three times that for the for the management.
Awesome. Thank you.
OK, the.
Next one is.
What impact then does training have? So we've got this sort of curve this this model here.
This is how we've characterized the impact of training. So and I'll talk about what that training is in a second, but but qualitatively what we've sort of said is training can help you to go up that slopey bit faster and then.
And or the slope, sorry that the level at which you top out at is potentially higher.
And one of the things that sort of I like about this particular sort of way of visualizing the effect of training is you could sort of look at the units of this, the units of this are sort of effectively measured in dollars per time.
And the units of this X axis down here is also in time measured in years. And those of you remember sort of you know integration in your calculus days will sort of know that that kind of means that this area in here.
Is measured in units of dollars, and so the benefits of training in this case is basically dropping directly out of this particular chart. If you said someone leaves the business after, let's say that period of time here.
The benefit of that person doing that training is is effectively measured by that area there. That turns out to be a useful kind of result when you're trying to sort of measure the the benefits of of training.
So the art is of course sort of going well, how, how big is the difference between the black line and the orange line. And that obviously depends a little bit on the the particular training that that's being offered up. So the particular training that I'd like to offer up as the.
The kind of a reference point is a hypothetical training program. So in this particular training program, someone's going to go off and spend a year in full time study, so 1200 learning hours, which is.
Notionally, the number of learning hours that sort of Tertiary Education Commission deems to be sort of a full-time learner, they're going to do this at a diploma level. So that's sort of Level 5 on the qualifications framework.
So loosely, sort of the first year of university is equivalent to that, or it's an apprenticeship would be a level 4. So it's sort of perhaps a program that sits just above a sort of an apprenticeship.
Um.
These next few variables are sort of probably.
Less relevant to today's discussion, but we're going to assume that the sort of the content of that course is fully relevant to that particular learner. It's going to be mostly classroom learning in this particular case, rather than on the job learning. Every learner that turns up to that class is going to complete the course. There's no one that's going to be sort of.
Partially completing. We're gonna assume that the delivery quality is typical of the training sector. It's not gonna be particularly brilliant, but not gonna be particularly awful either. And we're gonna assume that when that person gets back into their workplace.
They're going to be fully supported by their employer to make the most of that training and and allow that worker to sort of benefit from that training in terms of the productivity they're going to contribute to their workplace.
So now we get to the part where and require a little bit of sort of.
Imagination to try and sort of relate these two things, but if you could be thinking about the answer that you made to the to the question around how long that well, sorry back back to here.
You sort of sort of indicated kind of how many years did it take to get from here to here?
And I might actually use the result for the second one that you said here. So for this management practice rather than for the production related practice. So if we think about sort of what you answered in terms of the management practice answer.
The question is really sort of how many years of experience have you jumped by doing this training program? So if you sort of said it would take sort of 10 years to get, well, no, you wouldn't have said 10 years because I didn't give you that option, but if you said 12 years.
To go from.
Getting to the corner point, how many of those 12 years have we saved by by doing this program of study?
To pose you that question in terms of those different options.

Blair Morgans   1:25:30
Yeah, Adam, quick question. Would that depend on the starting point of the the person on the course? So what was their prior experience on farm? It's unlikely they'd be going on a level 5 diploma without experience or without kind of a a a background in farming, so.
They would already part way will be part way there I think.

Adam Barker   1:25:52
Yeah. OK. That's a good caveat. So let me, let me try and sort of think about what scenario I want. Well, so they could do that diploma potentially. There's different ways that it could be done. So you can, for example, do a sort of diploma at Lincoln.

Blair Morgans   1:25:56
Yeah, yeah.

Adam Barker   1:26:09
And agribusiness and you can do that sort of at the outset of your career as an alternative to a degree or you could potentially think about this as someone that's.
Come out of school and done the first year of a degree and then sort of given up on their degree and sort of moved into the workforce after that. Um.
Perhaps, perhaps I'll just at this stage give you the opportunity to interpret it either way. I think it's probably both both scenarios would be plausible to me, so.
Perhaps perhaps if you could sort of answer the question with what?

Adrienne Dawson   1:26:47
8.

Adam Barker   1:26:50
Which of those ones you sort of feel like you've sort of got the best ability to sort of have a go at answering and then perhaps if you could just sort of just say on the call which way you did it?

Adrienne Dawson   1:27:00
I was just going to say that I think that actually the answer would be different. So if it was somebody who'd done it without any farm experience, the the number of years you would save would be less would be my assumption than some than somebody who know the other way.

Adam Barker   1:27:00
Adrian.
Yep.

Adrienne Dawson   1:27:20
Around if you've got experience, doing the diploma would.
Save you more years and if you're a a fresh faced somebody with no background, uh, it might not be as applicable immediately, so you might save less. I I just think it's it's a different answer.

Adam Barker   1:27:41
Yeah. OK. OK. So, yeah, sorry. Well, I haven't set up the survey to allow us to do two different variants, but I sort of, I'll make that change actually, because that would be helpful to to run it both ways. So for now then, could I perhaps just ask you to try and pick one, pick one?
Answer it with what is consistent with your own pick and then perhaps we could just sort of just say out loud which what everybody did, just so that we've that would give me the record or drop it into the chat even.
Um, so I'm going to make my pick.
OK, 345678, looks like most people have made a pick. So could perhaps, Steve, just sort of just sort of.
Say what they've answered and and just just why or what their assumptions were and why.
Um, so, Blair?

Blair Morgans   1:28:47
I think for a new starter it could save maybe five years if I've got no experience, whereas if someone has either, you know, significant on farm experience and has worked on farm or been been raised on a farm so has a farming background, I I think it would.
Maybe be a three-year saving, two or three years kind of thing, yeah.

Adam Barker   1:29:10
Cool. Thank you.
Um Jane.
Want me to join?

Jane Muir   1:29:30
Sorry, trying to move my microphone around. Normally I just lift it up and it unmutes and down and it unmutes. Yeah, I put three years and I I would agree with Blair. Like I think the probably maybe there's a point where it's not when you're brand new, but when you're reasonably new, you would get more benefit.
Then if it's later on where hopefully you've kind of taken some practical experience and made some changes as a result of that.

Adam Barker   1:29:53
Yep.
Right. That makes sense. Yep. Um, Anthony.

Antony Heywood   1:30:07
Sorry, just finding my mute button. I've gone two years based on the fact that in our industry you're likely to come in with a little bit of either experience because of your lifestyle or you've transferring. So that's my two for me.

Adam Barker   1:30:26
Thanks. Hope we're not done, Vanessa.

Vanessa Malloy   1:30:33
Yeah, I did the same, um, as Jane with the three years in for the same rationale.

Adam Barker   1:30:38
Right. Thanks, Hamish.

Hamish Hodgson   1:30:42
I was. I was the big one. I went for 8 believer of training, big believer of training. I I had, I had the 12 and how many years it took to get there for for reference.
My person was someone new to the sector, so early on in the stage, and in my head it kind of looked a little bit like, you know, you're new, you do 2 years of of a farm role, farm assistant.
Role, you go and do your study. In my head, it actually worked out to be 5 years, but you did your year of study. You came back probably into a manager's role and then you where you had a lot more control over that stuff and then you had a year of refining and embedding.
The training that you've learned over that time that sort of came to five for me was the was the overall, I guess, gain, potential gain in that scenario. But yeah, I had eight for eight years in that last poll. Does that make sense? Does that make sense?

Adam Barker   1:31:55
Yeah, great. Thank you. Um.
Hello.

Nicholas Jolly   1:32:01
Yeah, I put three years as well. I think I sort of looked at it and without knowing exactly what a dip at Lincoln would be. I was more thinking, you know, you'd probably come out of that qualification with less hands-on skills than someone who'd been working for a year, but you'd reach a higher level faster.
Is sort of how I was kind of thinking it and that you you're learning how to learn and sort of learning some of the theory behind stuff. But yeah, really in all fairness, I just sort of picked a number that felt about right. There wasn't a whole lot of logic behind it.

Adam Barker   1:32:35
And in fairness, that's exactly what we've asked you to do. So yeah, for all of you, appreciate your tolerance for the ambiguity and and doing this. I mean, it's it's it's one of those sort of guessing how many Jelly beans in a jar kind of thing, that sort of thing. But but you do the same thing when you vote for a government each year or every three years as well. It's sort of.
Yeah, so, so the the process has precedence at least. Adrian, we haven't asked you, I don't think.
Why not while you're walking, Jenny?

Jenny Sinclair   1:33:08
I chose five years and I chose that on the basis of somebody having some experience on farm and then going off to do a diploma. And I think, uh, if you've got experience already, you've got something to hang your learning onto and so it embeds it.
Well, and you know what you need to know, so you learn it better. And and the five years was, yeah, based on more management level stuff, just, you know, knowing how to budget, knowing how to manage production.
So that, yeah, it would speed you up.

Adam Barker   1:33:50
Brilliant. Thank you. Um.
Bill, do you have a crack at this one?

Bill Kaye-Blake   1:33:57
No, no, I haven't wanted to pollute the the data set.

Adam Barker   1:34:00
Oh, you're definitely wouldn't pollute. Abron, did you have a go?

Adrienne Dawson   1:34:06
Uh, yeah, I um.
Like like the sorry the lady before me, I I had it round the other way around that that if you had no experience, I thought you'd say you would it would might be three years and if you had experience it might be 5.
Because you it it would be you're applying it to in a real, you know, with some real life.
Knowledge as opposed to it being completely theoretical.

Adam Barker   1:34:42
Thank you. Well, thanks all for assisting with this one and I guess the thing that I.
Am grateful for and this result is that mostly your results are reasonably clustered. It's it's you've all got slightly different thought processes which is exactly what we'd like but but the the no one no one's gone for the two outliers and and the results we've got there are not a zillion miles different to what we have sort of modelled so far but.
But certainly some of these results which are a little bit different to what we've used so far. So that's helpful. It's going to improve what we're doing.
OK. I would just like to sort of finish the the last sort of part of this is to try and introduce this last quality innate ability.
And this is where it gets a little bit more funky still. So innate ability is kind of this, for lack of a better word, sort of a sort of a catch all that captures everything else. So cognitive ability, intrinsic motivation, prior education levels coming up to training and then.
The dot dot dot is really other things that might sort of fit into that same set. So there isn't going to be any attempt to try and sort of analyze this in much more detail other than sort of saying we just assume that there is this lumped magic quality.
And we characterize it in a way that we take every, every employee in the industry and we sort of put them in a line. So at one end of that line sits the most or that the highest innate ability person in the workforce and at the other end of that line is the lowest innate ability person in the workforce.
I've got 20 people in my particular industry on the slide here, so that one person is the top 5% or the bottom 5%. You can imagine that that distribution and practice might actually look like a little bit of a normal distribution that you've probably got a bunch more people at sort of the middle than you do at the.
The outlier ends.
And if you imagine sort of that normal distribution sort of being, I've taken my line of people here and I've sort of turned it on its side. So you could sort of think about that experience curve that we had with sort of the line going up and then flattening out.
You could think about sort of different bands of that line that might apply as as you start increasing or decreasing innate ability. So the kind of sort of thing we're interested in here is really.
Is the spread that's due to innate ability as much as I've visualized it here? Or does this spectrum really sit in a much smaller band like that? Or have I understated that spectrum? Should it look more like something like?
That.
The way that I've got it drawn at the moment, with the sort of the top and the bottom being about there, does mean that we're kind of assuming that there's some people out here, someone that has very little experience and very low innate ability. They're not very clever or they're not very motivated to turn up to work each day.
Potentially actually has negative productivity to start with. They're actually costing the business to have them employed by the business when they when they start work and that might feel like a sort of a slightly peculiar concept, but.
I think it's fair to say that probably some of us have encountered people that points in time in our lives would say might have have negative contribution to a business's productivity, so.
I'd just like you to sort of suspend disbelief for a second if you're not comfortable with that one. But but the most important sort of thing we're really interested in here is to try and sort of again just quantify the relativity between this spread of innate ability and and this.
This kind of sort of distance here, which now we're going to try to measure this or to to sort of define the thought experiment by.
Osing a sort of a a little bit of a sort of a choice exeriment here, so.
Here we have two vegetable growers. One of them looks a little bit like Anthony, maybe with the mustache and the beard there, and that vegetable grower has no training.
Um, they are in the middle of the spectrum. They are sort of right dead smack middle here.
And they have some unknown amount of years of experience.
This other vegetable grower here is also untrained. However, they have with five years of experience.
And so they're sort of not probably up here yet. They are, they're probably down, well, let's call it sort of if I'm going to sort of define that this may be sort of 10 years, which may be a little bit of a sort of like a.
A fudge between the.
I came back up here. You talked about your time frames. I think we were sort of mostly around here for the production related stuff and we were mostly sort of around here for the management practices. I'm just trying to try and draw the the inflection point at sort of somewhere between those two things, 10 years.
So let's say that.
This.
Vegetable grower here has sort of reached about halfway up this curve here.
And this?
So let me actually sort of change my pen colors here. So um.
Hopefully you guys can sort of see where this is going.
So.
This vegetable grower here is.
Now this one here middle of the pack.
This vegetable grower here.
One in red here is.
Right U here somewhere.
Um.
And that one has five years of exerience. OI could actually use my ercentile lines and sort of say that this person is sort of somewhere around.
And.
There maybe if I was using my the lines as I've got them drawn there, but that's that is actually the question, so.
The question I'd like to pose is how many extra years of experience does vegetable grower on the left need to offset the fact that they are just sort of average in terms of innate ability rather than someone that's sort of sitting at the boundary between the.
1st and 2nd quartiles of innate capability.
Is that making sense as a question? Sorry, I realise that's just sort of getting all a little bit abstract at this point, but but OK, I'm seeing nods and thumbs up. That's marvellous.
So as opposed to five years of experience, how many extra years or how many total years do you need? That's question four in the survey.

Hamish Hodgson   1:43:02
Sorry, I'm just presuming that it's experience alone, not training, no training element in here, is it?

Adam Barker   1:43:08
No training yet? No. We're about to get to training next, but.

Hamish Hodgson   1:43:11
Bye.

Adam Barker   1:43:19
OK. No, brilliant. Thank you. So a really nice convergence on sort of five years there.
So the extra five years. So you the interpretation I've got there is basically sort of the.
The more or less you need to double your experience from five years to 10 years in order to offset that 25 percentile point difference in terms of innate ability.
OK. And So what you've said with that is what I think is consistent with intuition that into that the innate ability is probably the strongest influence on capability. It's a very.
It's a very, very strong driver. So and I think that's what I would sort of intuitively expect that no amount of training is sort of going to sort of be able to offset kind of sort of lack of intrinsic motivation or lack of cognitive ability. Well, sorry, sorry, no amount of training is going to be able to completely offset those things, so.
So training, while valuable, innate ability is probably actually the most valuable or potent thing.
OK. So thus far what we have done is we have answered a question that's basically traded off experienced versus training in that we looked at.
How far above the orange line effectively was above the black line or yeah, how much effect was really the steepness of this line we looked at. We've also looked at.
Experience versus innate ability. So you can sort of kind of guess the last question and this is the last one for the session is could we try and sort of do the same the third permutation of those 3 variables and actually sort of try and do a trade off.
Where we trade off training versus innate ability. So again, the training that we're going to talk about is this kind of reference training. So whatever you had in mind when you answered this training before, whether it was sort of like a start of career.
Training or whether it was something that you've done as a sort of an on the job training, perhaps just answer it the same way as you answered it before.
Um.
So.
Here our first in this case they've turned into our sheep farmers. Now sheep farmer is mid pack in terms of.
Yep. So how in this case has has.
Innate ability. He's got five years of experience, so they've both got five years of experience in fact. But sheep farmer one has done the reference training course. Our second sheep farmer has also got five years of experience.
She has not done the training course, but she is equal in capability to.
This her colleague. So where does she need to sit on this percentile spectrum to have the same capability as her colleague who's actually done the training? Is she one percentile point greater or is she 10 percentile points greater?
Is she potentially 40 percentile points greater? That's the final one. That one making sense.

Jane Muir   1:47:15
Adam, can you just put it back on the previous slide again so I can?

Adam Barker   1:47:16
Yeah.
Yep, sure can.

Bill Kaye-Blake   1:47:34
And I think Adam, on the calibration you said what does the second worker's innate ability need to be, but I think on the slide you said difference.

Adam Barker   1:47:43
Oh, yeah, sorry. Yep.
Um, yes. So what does there? Sure I should.
Right, that's that.
Yeah, hopefully the question that the choices made it more obvious.
OK, that's brilliant. So it looks like five of you have answered that one. Is anyone else sort of still pondering an answer?

Jane Muir   1:48:15
Gotta wrap my head around this one.

Adam Barker   1:48:18
Yeah, no, I appreciate this is a bit of a sort of a.
There's a reason why I was left to last, but hopefully you will have seen a pattern that each one's become a little bit harder to answer than the one before, and that's not entirely a coincidence.

Jane Muir   1:48:24
Yeah.
I.

Adam Barker   1:48:34
Um.
OK. Well, I'll just leave you to sort of answer the final. So that is that is where the the end of this discussion that's that's the the last of my slides. I would be really grateful just because of any feedback from anybody on any aspect of this, but I guess in particular have you sort of found this interesting?
Have you found this useful? Have you found it a horrific waste of your time? Any any thoughts anywhere on that spectrum would be gratefully received either now or afterwards?
Yeah, I don't know any, any, any comments at this stage?
Yeah.

Blair Morgans   1:49:16
Yeah, really good to be on the journey with you and trying to understand how you're formulating your, your, your, your model and stepping through it really slowly has been useful. So I think it would be great to con.
Be on this journey with you and and support that, yeah.

Adam Barker   1:49:36
Cool. Thanks, Blair. Jane.

Jane Muir   1:49:40
Yeah, like super interesting. It's made me think about things. Yeah, I've got more questions now than when I started, unfortunately. Thanks very much. But the but I am sort of thinking that the in this.
Innate ability one's quite interesting because it's people with higher innate ability of course have more choices. And so just, you know, knowing being that I work so much in the what's the workplace conditions like, they just have the ability to choose. So there's quite a lot of factors at play, isn't there? Like if you.

Adam Barker   1:49:58
I I just.

Jane Muir   1:50:17
Don't have. You're just not attracting those people at all if you don't have.
Yeah, you're you're going to attract more people with lower innate ability because they've got less choices probably. So hence that spread of return on investment, I I suspect might be one of the reasons why it's so big.
Might not be explaining that clearly, but anyway, you've look really interesting. I think there's more to to understand about it. And the only other thing I wonder is I would definitely agree that the more influence the person has, of course the greater impact the training is, but if people don't get into training at a.

Adam Barker   1:50:40
Yep, Yep.
Yeah.

Jane Muir   1:50:59
Younger age. Do they ever then get into training when that in those management positions? So yeah, like you're kind of this even though your value might not be as great in training your entry level people, I think.

Adam Barker   1:51:08
Yep.

Jane Muir   1:51:17
Yeah, I think once people are out of training in general, they find it harder to step back into it. The the the value has to be much more clearly articulated to that group.

Adam Barker   1:51:27
Yeah.
The Mukatangata model that we've been working on does provide a way to start to get to that because it models, because it effectively models a whole lot of people at an individual level. You can both model the impact on their productivity, but that.
Propensity to uptake training later in life, which which we have tried to build that modeling in there. So, so you can actually start thinking about that sort of dynamic if we if we didn't.
Didn't train people young and and and accepted a lower uptake of training later in life. Is that actually better or is it better to do what you suggested and train them young and order to get them later? We could actually play out those two scenarios to see which one of those actually works out better.

   1:52:12
Um.

Jane Muir   1:52:14
Yeah. Well, that that would be, that would be interesting, yeah.

Adam Barker   1:52:15
Um, cool.
Thank you, Vanessa. Hamish.

Hamish Hodgson   1:52:23
Yeah, really interesting. Um, very thought provoking, which is good. Um, I just, I guess curious as to where to from here and probably an observation that'd be really interesting to get some people from.
That that are in these shoes to to weigh in on it. You know, like that diploma was pretty, it was pretty impressive what that diploma achieved for some people within the primary industries.
Over the years, Um, and it would be great to get their thoughts on what it's actually done to them, you know, a little bit retrospectively as well.

Adam Barker   1:53:05
Yeah. I mean, I guess part of the where to from here is sort of a little bit of unknown and just sort of just seeing what shakes out and the sort of the ISPs and the sector next year was obviously a whole lot of moving parts. So exactly who's around to actually kind of sort of keep working on this, but but as sort of a personal.
On a level, I find this a really interesting area and so it is one that sort of Scalatti will skunks works away at this over the next little while and will try to find opportunities to sort of do the kind of calibrations here that Hamish you were talking about and.
And slowly, I hope, make it sort of an online tool, hopefully improve it.
Yeah, hopefully convince people like Adrian and Craig to use it and in the new world of IO space.
Yeah. And and hopefully sort of those people like you know Nicholas, Anthony that are wearing the Jane wearing the industry hat that hopefully you can sort of use this as well.
Yeah.

Adrienne Dawson   1:54:13
Yeah, I'm I'm still a little bit stuck on the the return on investment being so much higher for the for the owner than for the worker. And it it's like it's almost the exact opposite of where the government money currently.
Goes in terms of vocational education and training at any rate, right? Like most of it happens at that sort of Level 3 and four, a little bit at 2, hardly anything at those higher levels, partly because if you're not an employee, you don't get.

Nicholas Jolly   1:54:39
So.

Adam Barker   1:54:40
Yeah.

Adrienne Dawson   1:54:51
A subsidy for workplace training, but you know, so there's so there's there's a kind of a systemic assumption that it's the other way around that you get the most benefit. But maybe that's the stuff that Blair was talking about that that that.

Adam Barker   1:54:51
Yeah.
I think first, first.

Adrienne Dawson   1:55:09
That's the benefit to the learner as opposed to the benefit to the to GDP or whatever. Cause I I I feel like if I throw threw that in front of the employers that I was trying to get interested in training the staff.

Adam Barker   1:55:14
Yeah.

Adrienne Dawson   1:55:26
Uh, that would that would be a hard sell.

Adam Barker   1:55:27
Yeah.
Well, I mean, I think there's a lot of people that feel frustrated with what the observation you've made and that the systemic bias that you've described in the current system for a lot of people is wrong. And and Andrea Leslie, for example, is one of those. I think that sort of she fully recognizes that the training that.
ITO provides.
Isn't really the result of the training that primary ITO would necessarily feel like would be the right training if you were really trying to sort of improve industry outcomes. It is largely a result of sort of what the system incentivizes primary ITO to do and primary provides very rationally given the sort of the drivers that they've got.
But not necessarily doing doing what's the best use of their money. So even if this analysis is wrong, I hope it sort of starts that conversation and and hope it sort of begs that question and and gets people to think about it so.
And even if the 500 to one is a little bit optimistic, then I think, I think the storyline is is consistent with your observation, yeah.

Nicholas Jolly   1:56:37
Yeah, yeah. I think it's really useful for a quite a broad theoretical overview and trying to put some numbers around stuff that, you know, we we probably know already in that education is a useful thing for the sector. But you know, I think we all probably started from that.

Adam Barker   1:56:37
Nicholas Final One, Yep.

Nicholas Jolly   1:56:55
That basis and so having some numbers and looking at the scale of opportunity is quite useful. I think it's probably on industry organisations to sort of really understand what skills are required to drive the increased profitability and productivity within.
Each sector, which will be different from different ones and then feed that back into the, you know, the provider of education to make sure that there is a close link there, which you know, maybe in my view anyway and having been relatively new to it, it doesn't seem to be happening in the chief.
Big sector anyway.

Adam Barker   1:57:37
Anthony, you haven't said anything, hopefully because you're so overwhelmed that that but yeah.

Antony Heywood   1:57:46
No, you caught me. Caught me doing emails. Um.

Adam Barker   1:57:48
Ha ha ha.

Antony Heywood   1:57:51
Look, I think there is potential here, just for the simple fact that we are going through a whole reset with the new food and fibre industry skills board. So I think a lot of things can be put onto the table and we do need to find an efficient model and building the value proposition will be the only way that we're going to get.
So I think we're going in a good direction. Thank you.

Adam Barker   1:58:14
Cool. Hey look, thank you. Well, really, really super appreciate everybody's time today and appreciate your willingness to sort of give this approach a go and your your comments and I look forward to hopefully talking more about with you all in 2026.
Thanks again.

Jenny Sinclair   1:58:31
Thank you, Adam. Awesome.

Nicholas Jolly   1:58:31
Awesome. Thank you. Yeah, really interesting.

Jane Muir   1:58:33
Thanks, Adam.

Adam Barker stopped transcription
